It's put a crack in the illusion of social constructions, you know, I mean, people go
to jobs and then all of a sudden they're kind of like, my job isn't very real.
It was just a place I went to and I did some stuff and then I came home.
That's what jobs are.
And now people are working from home and they're questioning, you know, it's been a very big
shift in some of the fundamentals of the thinking mind.
The thinking mind loves what it would call normalcy.
It strives towards that and we can't have it.
It's saying, no, the thinking mind was denied the very thing it seeks, which is just this
kind of predictability.
Hello and welcome to the 75th episode of Neohuman Podcasts.
I'm Agabahari, an agologist on Twitter and Instagram and you can follow this show on
LiveInLimbo.com, iTunes, YouTube, BitChute and soon on Spotify following the lead of
Joe Rogan.
And on this episode, I'm welcoming back Chris Niebar and welcome back to Neohuman, Chris.
Thanks.
Great to be here.
Yeah, man.
It's like a different world since the last time that we spoke and you came to my mind
literally the first person when this corona thing happened.
I have to talk to Chris Niebar and it took me about 10 episodes to get to you, but things
happen as they happen.
Let's start for those of our audience who are not familiar with you, with your background,
the lives you've lived and what are you mainly focused on now these days?
Yeah, those are some good questions.
My research for the last 30 years has been in the left and right sides of the brain and
how they differ.
That's an interesting field to be in these days because on the one hand, the worst thing
that could happen for a scientist is your ideas become popular.
As soon as they became popular, then everyone dismissed it and so when I tell people I do
left right brain research, they're like, oh, I thought that whole thing was disproven.
I'm like, well, no, it's more complex than that.
But then along the whole way, I've been doing – the neuroscience led me up to a certain
level of understanding and I always felt that it was just part of the picture.
So for the last 30 years, I've also been studying Buddhism, Zen, Taoism, Hindu philosophy
and to me, they made a very nice match.
I found it pretty easy to kind of weave the two together into kind of a philosophy or
a kind of system and that's what I've been working on.
That's what I – I'm working on my second book here and the second book is really going
to be about consciousness.
And the main problem in consciousness research and how particularly in the West, we confuse
the thinking mind, which is a great tool and it's the thing that's allowing us to kind
of converse right now.
But we confuse the thinking mind with the essence of consciousness and I think when
we make that mistake, it takes us down a really weird trip and that's the problem.
We have so many brilliant people doing consciousness research right now and that their biggest
drawback is they're brilliant and it's their brilliant thinking mind that occupies
so many of these different little puzzles and you know, it's the thing about life
and the thinking mind, it's like this endless onion that has, you know, layer after – and
it just keeps going on and so the thinking mind never finds any rest and so it's nice
to take a break and I like to think that maybe Monday through Thursday, I'm kind of a scientist.
I don't know how I slipped that in now because now Friday became part of the weekend.
Then Friday through, you know, Sunday, I'm a Buddhist, you know, I'm a Taoist and I
practice meditation and I practice not thinking and so I put the thinking mind aside on the
weekends to the best that I can.
Sometimes it's a struggle.
The thinking mind is so convinced that there are so many problems out there and the thinking
mind searches for a problem and if it can't find one, it will make one up and so the weekends,
you know, it's interesting.
It's also interesting that not only you come up with problems that make it seem so
real, once you solve that problem, it changes the goalposts.
Like, oh, that was not it, you know, it was just part of –
That wasn't the real problem.
Now we're doing – and it just goes on and it just never – and that's the thing.
The thinking mind keeps believing if I just have this much money in the bank, if I just
have – if I just have this, if this will happen, then I can finally start living.
And we're figuring out like that just never happens and then you end up, you know, in
your 50s, you're old and then all of a sudden you're like, what happened to my life?
Oh, I spent my life thinking, I spent my life thinking, creating problems and every time
I solved one, another one came on the scene.
And so – and that's, you know, and we're kind of experiencing that really firsthand
here, you know.
It's funny you said how much has changed and it's absolutely true on some level, like
the whole world is different.
And then on some other level, no, it's the same exact world.
Everything's exactly the same.
I'm sitting here in the same office, I go for the same walk, you know, but on another
level it absolutely seems different.
Yeah, I started talking to people when this whole thing begun focused on why this also
can be an opportunity for us to realize that a lot of things that we have relied on, it's
not that they've been disrupted, it's just that they've – all of them have been basically
illusions and delusions and stuff that we have made up for ourselves and took them seriously
and now that something is – it's very organic that it's happening and targeting our very
survival.
Now we're realizing, oh, we can't rely on government, we can't rely on my degree,
we can't rely on our jobs and a lot of people are freaking out exactly because of that it
seems like.
It's put a crack in the illusion of social constructions, you know, I mean people go
to jobs and then all of a sudden they're kind of like, my job isn't very real.
It was just a place I went to and I did some stuff and then I came home.
That's what jobs are and now people are working from home and they're questioning, you know,
it's been a very big shift in some of the fundamentals of the thinking mind.
The thinking mind loves what it would call normalcy.
It strives towards that and we can't have it.
It's saying no, the thinking mind was denied the very thing it seeks, which is just this
kind of predictability and now all of a sudden – and now we get no end state.
I don't know how things are where you're at here in Pennsylvania, it's not quite the
same all over the country of course, but we still have no particular end state and so
the thinking mind could probably deal with quite a bit if it knew in some point if it
could bring all these illusions back online and it's like putting this permanent kind
of we don't know when we can bring those back online so they may be permanently, you
know, jobs and some of our social roles and like you mentioned government and I've been
doing a couple of videos on the idea of what government even means and what would it mean
if we didn't have government and the idea of control and self-control.
That's one of the main things about the thinking mind.
It's always this game of control and then when you put – like I said, I try to give
myself a break over the weekends and put the thinking mind away for a little bit and what
I realized is that the moments of levity and the moments of just this beautiful consciousness
are almost always when I put down this notion of control and this insistence that reality
has to be some particular way and then you pick up and you're like this must be like
this and everything gets heavy again and –
And then you build your expectations on that basis which is a sandcastle to begin with.
Yeah, yeah and then it's just that wonderful, you know, game that we've been playing.
The game that we've been playing for a long time has – it's like, you know, everyone
is playing Monopoly and someone just came and hit the board and said no, this is just
a game.
We're like – we're kind of like no, it's – we want to – like you mentioned
how we take things seriously and that's something I've been pondering a lot over
the last few months.
It's this – in fact, theoretically in terms of the left and right brain, if someone were
to ask me like what's the real difference between the left and right sides of the brain,
at least for right now, I would probably say the left brain takes the world terribly seriously
and the right brain just sees it as a play, a joke, a game and it's not terribly serious
about anything and you can see that kind of attitude and when you get serious, which again,
we've kind of turned a lot on to the seriousness lately, you know, this must happen, this has
to happen and that just gets everyone, you know, what is it?
It's just this kind of tense contraction of the muscles that people feel and we're
paying the price for it.
You can see all over, like in the US, you can see the suicide rates, the addiction rates,
I mean everything is just kind of going through the roof because it's like we're a kid
and, you know, we won our way and someone came along and said you're not getting it
and the thinking mind has no clue what to do with that.
It's funnier saying it, one of our relatives, she actually, she will turn 70 in two or three
days.
In the beginning of all of this, we were like, hey, you have to take care of yourself, stay
home, don't go out and she wasn't taking it seriously whatsoever, she went to the casino,
she went to a whole bunch of shopping mall and all of a sudden, right now, she's not
even allowing her husband to order pizza.
You know, when she comes over, everybody should wear a mask.
This conviction that what you have in mind is the objective truth and objective reality
and because people don't agree with you, it just means that they're wrong and they
have to be convinced how wrong they are and all it produces from my perspective is just
further and further anxiety and energy that is being wasted because you're achieving
nothing.
You're going against a far bigger reality that you're not even acknowledging its existence.
This notion, so I try not to watch too much of the news but I do sometimes keep up on
things because there's a certain need where you feel like, you know, you don't want to
be totally out of the loop on something this big and I have yet to hear someone just come
right out and say, look, we don't have a clue as to what's going on.
We really don't know.
Maybe this virus will wipe out the human race or maybe it's absolutely nothing and it's
trivial and that's very difficult for the thinking mind to deal with.
The thinking mind would rather have a bad idea and feel conclusive about it, you know,
than to just admit, I don't know and you know, and we don't know.
We don't know what's going to happen.
And we never know.
I mean, that's the weird thing about this trip we call life.
I mean, I've known people who have worried and, you know, kept them up all night over
things and then something else came along in their life and killed them and they had
no clue that that was waiting for them, you know, that old saying, you know, you make
plans and God laughs and, you know, we're so sure our plans, oh, well, we need to do
this or we need to do that and I, you know, where's the movement who's just admitting
and embracing the idea that we just don't know, you know, it's like Alan Watts, that
wisdom of insecurity, you know, there's a certain truth that we just, as much as the
thinking mind wants to control nature, the problem with nature is it's an incredibly
complex system and complex systems are very difficult to predict.
So when you talk about viruses alone and then you add in the human element, that makes it
even more unpredictable.
Human beings are very difficult to predict and maybe it's free will or maybe it's just
that we're caught, I mean, you can predict us in groups, you know, so they have to Thanksgiving,
lots of people are going to go shopping and you can predict certain things like that.
But you can't predict which people, like you were saying, you know, some people had a certain
attitude with this and then all of a sudden everything flipped and now they're like a
different person and that's the difficult thing about people, you know, on an individual
basis we're really difficult to predict, I never know what I'm going to do, my wife
will tell me, she's like talking to you gives me whiplash because you know, you're talking
about something one moment and then you're off on some other, you know, I don't know
what you're going to say.
My girlfriend had the same problem with me.
I'm having fun though, you know, like that's, I think that's, I think that's the message
we can take from this, you know, is, and of course, and people will say, well, life and
death is on a line and that's the game that, you know, are we going to take that one seriously
too?
You know, I mean, what if it's all a game, you know, and you know, this comes up a lot
with Alan Watts and people will say, well, you know, if he was so enlightened, why did
he drink so much?
You know, he was a pretty bad alcoholic and probably died because of drinking related
problems.
But you know, then you wonder like, you know, I mean, if it really, what is the essence
of the game to live a really long life or to have, maybe it should be shorter, but you
had a lot of fun with it.
You know, I don't know.
I mean, I, I wouldn't give there to give any advice on any of these matters except just
to bring up different alternatives and, you know, like, and enjoy, you know, the different
scenarios and play, you know, play the game and have a little bit of fun with it.
Try to.
You mentioned Alan Watts, I think Alan Watts also said, the problem is that we are taking
seriously what gods have created for fun.
Yep.
And that's, that's put all together, you know, we're taking seriously what we, what
should have been a joke, a grand cosmic joke that we should keep us laughing.
And we do have these experiences, you know, or something that we get really worried about.
And, you know, we can feel the muscular tension and we get all, and then all of a sudden you
realize it was nothing.
And then you laugh about it.
You're like, I can't believe I actually got sucked into thinking how serious that was.
But then we can't seem to take that.
Like right now, this game that we're playing, and again, someone might get very offended
to say, oh game, this isn't a game, this is serious.
And I know, I understand that, but at the same time, on some kind of cosmic level, you
know, can we take that message and live a life of play, you know, like kids, you know,
kids are wonderful.
And like Ella Watt said, you know, it's like music is interesting because people play music,
but they go to work, you know, and that's the trick and we go to work, but really make
it play, you know, and it's been very difficult because we're at a very serious, you know,
you go out and you venture out, I mean venturing out to a local store becomes a very serious
kind of thing, you know, and mask wearing, the whole mask debate, I did a video on, you
know, should we be wearing masks and that's a very, you know, I mean, can you imagine
like 10 years ago, someone saying, oh, by the way, there's going to be this kind of
like, you know, war over whether you should wear a mask or not.
I mean, you'd find it kind of like, in a way, I can't imagine people would take that,
you know, why?
And who knows how people will retrospectively look at this and it's the same thing.
No one knows, really, whether if I go out today with a mask on or if I go out without
them, no one knows what the consequences are.
The system is far too complex.
Yeah.
And the idea that we can be protected 100% because all of a sudden we decided to wear
masks because, you know, this is a very different society, I'm in Florida, you're in Pennsylvania,
but if you go to Japan, people have been wearing masks for decades in Japan.
If you're sick, you wear a mask, but that has not much to do with you being shamed or
forced to do it.
This is like just an ethic thing, like nice thing, you know, you're being a decent human
being not wanting to spread your sickness to other people.
Well, that's understandable, but to say that, hey, you're not allowed to live outside of
your home if you're not wearing a mask, then you got to wonder what else is coming after
that, that this whole narrative is based on fear.
There is nothing else.
Hey, be afraid of this.
We got to put, you know, all of these restrictions and controls and everything more and more
aspects of your life, maybe so people can be even more predictable.
What you said about group thinking, I'm thinking about that.
I don't care about birthdays.
I'm offending people with that.
I don't care about holidays.
I'm offending people with that, but I cannot take it seriously.
I don't understand what is the point of celebrating a day that is just a random day we came up
with and something has happened, but people are taking it very seriously.
But now that you're saying that, I'm thinking maybe those days and those events, they exist
to begin with to predict people and sell them stuff and built upon that.
Well, that's the thing about the thinking mind.
It figures out, it's very difficult to control the thinking mind and one of my favorite exercises
is just, you know, a simple thing like don't think of the number 13 and sure enough, people
will think of the number 13 and so the thinking mind, you realize that it's difficult if not
impossible to control and that's what we deal with when we meditate.
You know, you're sitting there.
I remember when I was in my 20s and I would try to meditate and I thought if I could just
control my mind and today that seems so laughable.
You can't control your mind.
Oxymoronic, yeah.
And so, you know, and then you figure out you just let it kind of do its thing.
But the mind seems like when it can't control itself, the first thing it does is start to
control other minds and it seems to find quite a bit of satisfaction with this.
And I think I've kind of feel like a stranger in humanity with this.
I don't, at least on the surface, I've never felt like I've gotten anything out of trying
to control other minds.
But as I observe other humans, that seems to be one of the things, it's one of our hobbies,
you know.
It's like we want to control other minds and I mean, and this whole debate seems to be
like, why do I care what you do?
Shouldn't I be a little more concerned with why I'm concerned with what you're, why am
I concerned with what you're doing?
But that's that thing in our culture, you know.
We shifted over to the external and instead of turning it inward and I mean, that's quite
a thing to ponder, I think, you know, to walk away from and go, you know, that dude, you
know, in the store wasn't wearing a mask and man, that irritates me.
Why does that irritate me?
You know?
What is it about me that it really irritates me about that?
Because I mean, we could spin scenarios, I mean, the frontal lobe is wonderful at spinning,
you know, what ifs.
Oh, well, if you didn't wear that mask, then there's this hypothetical possibility that
this could have happened and this could have happened, that could have eventually, and
we can spin scenarios like that, but we have no clue whether that's, you know, those are
accurate.
And I mean, the core is like, really, what was it about this person doing this thing
that, you know, that set me off?
And the more you investigate that stuff, man, you're gonna, you'll go on this trip, you'll
find that it's all, all the stuff that bothers you, it literally is, it's a mirror shooting
right back at you, figuring out, oh, you know, maybe it's a shadow kind of thing and like,
maybe you want to rip your mask off and go running through, you know, and you're mad
because you're wearing it, so that's what really makes you mad.
And so, you know, this has been an interesting time and some people have pointed out the
blessings and some of the real things that, you know, the kind of introspective moments
that we can have.
You know, you're sitting at home, what are you gonna do, you know, are you gonna crack
open that book of philosophy, are you gonna start pondering the big questions about life
and like, what are you doing here, you know?
I started off with the question of consciousness and I'm like, it's one of the strangest things,
the all-time strangest things about consciousness is to most people, it doesn't seem strange.
It's just like, oh yeah, I'm a conscious being, you know, I have consciousness, I'm experiencing
the world and that just is like the most trivial thing when if you just stumble on that, like,
you know, you should just go running through the streets, go like, man, I'm a conscious
being, this is the freest thing, you know, it should terrify us and, you know, send us
on this amazing trip to just the fact that we're conscious and somehow we have the ability
to just trivialize it and just think it's ordinary and we're more worried about someone
having a mask on than, you know, contemplating the fact that I'm a conscious entity in this
universe and what's my connection with other conscious and, you know, are we all, you know,
those kind of questions are the ones I think, it's like, you know, stumbling into the dark
forest, it's like we'd rather, you know, argue about the trivialities, I think, than kind
of get into the deep stuff, but this is our task, this is a moment, you know, what are
we going to do with it?
What are you going to do with the extra time you're spending at home, you know?
It also seems like people use those terms, God is another one, that people just throw
around God and like, oh yeah, I know, I talk to God, I pray to God, but if you ask them
who is God, what is God, there isn't going to be that much of an answer more than like
a line or two that you can hear or read anywhere else and it seems like, it reminds me of what
Stephen Hawking said that the biggest enemy of knowledge is not lack of it, but the illusion
of it and it seems like we're just looking for things and elements to prove ourselves
right, but we don't know that the one who's looking to be proven right is not us.
Yeah, that's one of the, you know, do you believe what you believe you believe?
It's a big, you know, I mean, like you said, people throw around phrases like God, it's
like, well, do you really believe what you believe you believe?
Is this something that you really think that there is an entity and that's controlling
the universe or, you know, it's the same thing with spiritual types and you can find some
spiritual types that on one hand say we're all connected and then they're flipping someone
off because, you know, they're not wearing a mask and then, you know, or they'll put,
you know, everyone in this thing of, well, we're all interconnected except this person.
And so it's tough, you know, do you believe what you believe you believe?
You know, that's a tough question that we could take this time and really contemplate
on.
Who is the you?
That's another answer.
Because let's say in our conversation in not you and me, but in a common two people conversation,
there are four different versions of each individual, right?
The one who you think you are, the one who you want other person to think you are, the
one who you think the other person think you are and the one that you want other person
and the one who you really are, right?
So this is like we haven't even found the definition of you and I and we go around and
collect different degrees and collect different certifications and credentials basically to
align everybody else according to our objectives and ethics and morality and we use everything
that we can culturally, socially, politically to prove that, hey, what I'm telling you is
right.
Just follow what I'm saying and it's all going to be all right.
And in the end, what we're trying to do is convince ourselves that we are a we, like
I am an I and I'm going to do everything I can to convince that there really is such
a thing.
I mean, we spend so much time, like you said, you know, doing whatever we can because we
can know, I think we know that that's the same kind of concept of anything else that
we're trying to really define.
You know, if you nudge it a little bit, if you push it a little bit, we have to admit
that we don't really know, you know, that's one of my favorite all time questions and
I could spend so much time just, what do we mean, like, you know, we just start a conversation
and then you stop the conversation and you say, oh, I noticed you said I, I mean, what
do you mean by that, you know, and what do you mean when you say I, what do you and to
me, all I can, I mean, I've come up with a thousand different explanations, so many different
definitions of who I think I am.
I realized that that's all I am is who I think I am at that particular time.
Absolutely.
It's fluid.
It's, it's, it changes, it changes so much and so fast that it's, it amazes me that anyone
could possibly take it seriously, you know, I mean, you could be all confident and like,
I always think of like, you know, Denzel and training day and you know, you're going to
go in there with it and then some little happens and you, you know, you fall apart like George
Costanza, you know, and it's like, and that's like, wow, there's no consistency in the self.
It's continuously fluid and changing and, and I'm like, how do we ever fall for it?
How do we, I don't know.
Like you said, we spend a lot of time trying to convince ourselves that there is something
behind there, you know.
Well, it's also the brainwashing and propaganda that we're all exposed to some more than others.
I think I mentioned I was born in Iran and the second I was born, I was labeled as a
Shia Muslim Iranian straight male.
Not good luck changing any of those throughout your entire life because it's like, hey, you're
born into this tribe.
This is what we expect of you and you have to live your life accordingly.
And I didn't, you know, I'm a male, I have no problem with male, but I literally changed
all of it and I got alienated by that community, by that society because, you know, how dare
you not talking about glorious history of Iran or how dare you not being straight or
anything.
It's just like all of this nonsense that you're being born into and then continue repeating
it because you are convinced that one more day, a thousand more dollars, another degree
and it's all going to be fine.
And it's a road to nowhere.
It's funny how you put that.
The more I can convince you that you are you, the more I ultimately convince me that there's
an I in there somewhere.
Absolutely.
If I can categorize and label you, I feel a little bit better that there's something
in me that also fits these labels.
If I can get you to buy the story, then I buy the story a little bit.
There's a quote I've been pondering on from Krishnamurti for years and it always sort
of irritated me and I think that tells you something and I'm just going to paraphrase
it.
It's something like if you categorize yourself in any way, you know, whether it's religion
or any kind of identification with some category, you are committing an act of violence and
it always kind of bothered me.
I'm like, come on, man, you know, is it really violent?
And I think I can understand a little bit more of what he's saying, you know, the second
I categorize myself and affiliate with, I'm limiting myself from possibilities, you know,
I'm fitting myself into a certain group, that means automatically I'm denying myself some
other membership and I'm kind of like, I'm building, I'm taking like ever increasingly
smaller boxes to put myself in.
And then what happens when you find people like you who you're just like, no, I'm not
going to do it and it irritates people and they're like, why won't you just fit into
the box?
And they get offended.
Yeah.
And you're just, I'm not doing it.
I'm not playing that game.
And that sets them people off, you know, they want you to play, you know, it's like any
game we play, you know, if you kind of start making up some rules during the game, it can
be irritating.
But then you're just like, well, look, I'm playing a different game and you know, some
days I'm more in the mood and I'm like, I throw something out and I just look at people
peeling this onion that they define themselves by trying to convince me that no, look, I'm
older or I've worked for government for 20 years or I have two PhDs.
So obviously I'm right.
So just admit it.
I'm like, no, I'm not going to admit it.
I don't care who you are.
This is what I think and what I think is just as accurate as what you think.
Yeah.
It's interesting you would phrase it like that because a friend of mine, all these professors
and there's almost a movement where they're trying to push reputation as a factor to take
into consideration when you're trying to ascertain the truth.
And there's this push like, look, we really have to and I'm like, no, reputation is kind
of irrelevant.
I don't care who's saying what.
It's really like, let me just evaluate the argument and you know, I'm not particularly
interested in who says it, but yet there seems to be this push because it makes life a little
more comfortable.
If I say, look, I've got these letters after my name and I tell students all the time as
a joke, I'm like, you know, the whole PhD thing is this complete social construct.
I mean, it exists literally because a couple of people agreed on, okay, we'll put these
letters after your name and it's like this kind of shady deal that goes on, but it goes
on to such an extent that everyone kind of, they don't realize that it's this kind of
this kind of backdoor deal.
It's like, okay, well, this person did this and this and we'll, we'll give them this kind
of like, you know, status and it's like, well, okay, I mean, I guess we'll buy into it like
any other social contract, but there's just not much behind it.
I mean, there really isn't that much of a difference between Yale faculties and graduates
and Freemasons.
It's like a group of people who go through a process and they receive a credential based
on which they are respected, they have the name and, or any other group or tribe or this
kind of institution, right, to create, to solidify uncertainty and sell it to people
as something certain.
Yeah, it's interesting you would connect that with certainty.
And I think that's kind of the ultimate quest of the thinking mind.
It's even though it's a complete illusion, it wants to find that certainty and one of
the ways that you can find predictability and certainty and just a sort of orderliness.
You know, that's the thing.
If you put us all in the categories, it's like taking your desk and you finally organize
it all, which I almost never do, but you're like, you know, some people are really prone
to that and they like to have everything, the more organized you are, the more predictable
everything is.
And for some people, that's very, very pleasing.
And I probably mentioned the last time we talked, I probably mentioned Ian McGillcrest
and his wonderful book, The Master and His Emissary, where he talks about how our culture
in the West, we're obsessed with bureaucracy and we're obsessed with paperwork and it's
all about control.
You know, these people will want you to sign paperwork to get forms to order more forms
and you can't help but to laugh about it occasionally, you know, like, well, I mean, you want me
to sign this?
You really want me to put a scribble on a piece of paper?
And these traditions go back thousands of years, I mean, but you know, we're continuously
trying to create order.
I just did a video the other day about order and chaos and I kind of centered it around
that 70s show, Get Smart, which I vaguely remember as a kid, but it was this funny kind
of play between the chaos agents who were evil, you know, they were just like this element
of randomness and we can't have that.
So the control agents would continuously battle it out to find order in chaos.
And that's kind of what we're trying to do, you know, the more you can label me and find
me a PhD, then it makes things more predictable, you don't expect PhDs to do certain things
and I just, to me, nature has always been more of a wild ride into the unpredictable.
And I mean, that's a wonderful thing, like even right now, like, you don't really know
what I'm going to say next, you know, and to me, that's very interesting.
That's the beauty of it.
If I know more predictably what you're going to do in a conversation, it's fine.
And I have plenty of conversations like that, but to me, I'd always gravitate towards, you
know, exploring the unpredictable a little bit rather than the comfort of predictability.
But that's an unusual thing, I think, in our culture, what most people would rather trade
the comfort of predictability for the unknown.
But I think that's our real adventure is to just take a step into that.
And that's what we're dealing with right now.
Like I said before, no one wants to admit that we don't know what's going to happen.
And in a way, that makes life very interesting to not know what's going to happen.
Well, it could be more boring than really, I mean, we want, we say we want predictability,
but we don't really want it.
Who would, I mean, at the same time, now we're complaining about, oh, every day, it's like
Groundhog Day, every day is the same, you know, and it's like, well, there, you wanted
predictability, now you got it completely.
That's not as much fun as you thought it was going to be, is it?
You know, we want that element of adventure and unpredictability and the universe offers
us that.
I mean, that's the thing about nature.
It's always been, you know, you think you're going to get something and it throws you a
curve all the time.
Yeah, this podcasting has been a very interesting experience about what you're talking about,
but I'm mostly interested in people who, again, as you said, I don't know what they're going
to talk about.
Like I had John McAfee a couple episodes back on the podcast, had no idea what he was going
to say.
He's a fugitive now and he started drinking right off the bat and he said, this is what
I'm going to be.
I'm like, awesome.
I'm looking forward to see what's coming out of this.
But there are some people who they ask for questions beforehand before coming to the
show and I'm like, I don't know what I'm going to ask you.
I'm going to ask you the first question and then something comes to my mind.
I'm going to ask you that and then maybe some kind of a short rant come to my mind.
I'm going to say that and this is how it's going to be.
But some people are very, very afraid of stepping into the unknown and I think that is exactly
the point that I keep telling people around me who we usually gather a small group of
people experimenting with psychedelics.
I've been doing it for more than 10 years.
These guys have been doing it for a few years.
So it's really awesome for me to just be there available to, as they're saying, tie the knots
or open some doors that they didn't even know existed through conversation and creating
momentary temporarily order out of chaos and then move back to the chaos.
So it's all about, as I'm telling them, hey, whatever you're afraid of the most, that is
your indicator to go right through it, face it right away.
And Joseph Campbell also, I came across a quote saying, the cave you're afraid of the
most has the treasure that you seek.
But it seems like people are paralyzed by fear and they're not even willing to give
it a shot.
How would they snap out of it?
Yeah, if you get into some of the mythology, the grail myths, and there's an old saying
that the grail castle is always down the road to the left.
And I think one of the meanings of that is like, look, this adventure, dealing with life
as an adventure, it's always right there in front of you.
But it's a terrifying choice.
And I think it was Kierkegaard who said that just the idea of being free, just the idea
that right now I could say or do something like anything, like that's so overwhelming
for people that they would really choose to not indulge at all.
They don't want to play the game.
It's too terrifying.
And so we choose not to choose.
We get into these very predictable social roles that it's very comforting and I can
understand it.
There are some days I think, wow, man, I would really like to just live a normal life.
Not have opened this jar of consciousness and existence and be an accountant or sell
insurance and take the whole thing seriously and I have moments like this, I won't kid
you that I don't.
So I can empathize.
That kind of existence, I think it's quote normal for people.
I think the vast majority of our species, I think that's the path we choose and it's
the anomalies like you are just like, let's open the door of chaos and let's sit in really
interesting anticipation what's going to happen next because I don't know and you don't know.
No one knows.
That's what makes the whole thing so fascinating to me.
And I think that the kind of adventurous types in terms of evolution, I think there's always
been maybe 10% or less of the adventurous types to keep existence interesting but the
vast majority are the types that just go down that path that a thousand other people have
taken and that's good for the species in a way, I suppose.
That's why people like me marry people like my wife.
She keeps me grounded.
If I married someone like me, I would be sleeping on the side of a river somewhere, hanging
out in the woods.
I can appreciate a certain type of grounding but I think even for those types, you can
open the door a little bit, have a little bit of an adventure.
You don't have to go trip and completely lose your identity.
You can have small versions of it and sometimes I think that works too.
We talked about institutions and professors and PhDs and all that.
One of the trends that keep coming up in the past few episodes is how these institutions
have monopolized resources for specific fields to be studied.
Use physics as an example that for decades supposedly, the only field that money would
have gone to is string theory.
So it didn't matter how good of an argument you had.
It didn't matter what good of a research you wanted to do.
If it was not string theory, it would have been shunned because the apparatus of that
institution had capitalized on string theory and this is the answer again, certainty.
So we're talking about consciousness as understanding it being basically the most important thing
that we can even ponder about or begin to understand it but how would that be possible
in this kind of a situation?
If you go to the biggest universities, they're like, we want to study consciousness, okay,
what it's all about?
We don't know.
Yeah, because the fundamentals behind the university is that there's an answer and
that we'll give you an answer and that students are paying for an answer.
I mean, when I start my consciousness class every semester, I come out and tell them like,
look, I'm going to babble on and there's going to be a lot of sounds coming out of my mouth
but in the end, no one has a clue about what consciousness really is.
And that to me is the adventurous part of this class and we get to admit that it's still
fun to talk about.
As I always say, the Tao Te Ching comes right out and says, look, anything I say isn't the
true Tao but what the heck, I'm going to talk about it anyway.
And so that's what we do but academia doesn't want to hear that.
So I kind of sneak mine in but the truth is, you know, academia wants results and results
mean it's the same thing I was talking about early on when I said we don't want to admit
that we don't know.
To be an honest institution, so many fields in physics and philosophy should just come
out and say, look, there's stuff we really don't know but that doesn't sell well.
A much better, you know, it's much easier to sell a package that, look, we know this
stuff and here's the package of knowledge and if you pay this money for a tuition, you're
going to come out feeling like you know something.
And I've told my students for years, when you get your PhD, you should have an overwhelming
sensation of how little you know.
You should recognize that there's so little that you know.
You should feel overwhelmingly ignorant.
That's not a great sell for people, you know.
That's not a like pep talk.
People don't want to like, oh, that's not like your speech to get people in the graduate
school.
You know, the thinking mind is obsessed with this notion that we can know and the universe
is knowable.
You know, I think Einstein said, you know, the most incomprehensible thing about the
universe is that it's comprehensible and I'm like, no, it isn't.
It's not.
And thinking like it's very frustrating.
It may not be.
I'm not saying that I know with certainty that it isn't.
I just question whether it is.
Maybe it isn't.
And that maybe is enough for some people, it turns them off, I think.
Really the most interesting argument in favor of predictability and orderly nature of universe
to me is coming from people who are working on artificial intelligence and algorithms.
And their argument is that anything that is not quantifiable is therefore chaotic.
But philosophically speaking, if we digitize everything and allow the processing power
to be able to process it, which would be artificial general intelligence, for example, even the
waves of the ocean and the flux of bird flying would be predictable and measurable.
So that is a very interesting argument.
But again, there is no certainty that that is the answer either.
The artificial intelligence is such an interesting field because I think in some ways they make
the mistake the most explicitly in the sense that they're creating artificial minds.
And just admit it, you're creating artificial thinking minds.
So you're taking the thinking mind, the element of it's not consciousness.
So in my class, I teach a class on artificial intelligence and this is one of the main points
of the class is like, we may replicate the thinking mind and in fact, we've already replicated
the thinking mind.
And the more the thinking mind becomes replicated, the more predictable.
There are certain things about the thinking mind that are incredibly predictable.
But that's it.
We're not replicating consciousness and we're not replicating and it's such an interesting
thing.
I can appreciate people who would have such an incredible goal that we could in principle
predict the flight changes in a flock of birds or the way the ocean, the waves, something
so fundamentally unpredictable.
My gut, which who knows how fine tuned that is, but I would say it's probably never going
to happen.
But I do also find it very interesting that someone would hold that position.
To me, that's a fascinating kind of adventure too, the kind of thing, maybe we could predict
the unpredictable.
I think it's also the terminology too, because with AI, actually I had the gentleman who
coined the term along with two other people, Peter Voss on the podcast, he coined the term
artificial intelligence in early 90s and artificial general intelligence, AGI is what he coined.
But I like to think of that A as not artificial but augmented intelligence, because there
is no need to recreate a machine that is working in the way that our human brain does.
But augmenting it to be able to experience in a more expanded kind of a way is a very
interesting notion to me and especially now, are you familiar with Neuralink, Elon Musk's?
Yes.
So, what do you think about that?
Because that's what it does.
His whole thing is that you put this implantable human computer interface to expand the capability
of your brain and heal the parts of it that are damaged, therefore you'll be able to receive
the information at a rate that will be comparable to an AI system, because his argument is that
there is no way that we can compete with these machines, which I agree with in a sense that
we are creating a completely non-Darwinian kind of an event here.
What are your thoughts about that?
I would guess that what's going to happen is that to the extent that we figure out the
brain and we've done a great job in terms of figuring out the thinking mind, fields
of psychology, we've mapped out hundreds of different flaws the thinking mind is susceptible
to and so one of the nice things, like you said, we could augment this and we can come
up with a better version of the thinking mind, one that's not going to make all the flaws
that the human mind does and at the same time we can also go in and tweak the human brain
and kind of upgrade it.
My guess is though these are all going to be really significant in terms of how we think
about the world.
I don't see them as doing anything that's going to genuinely expand actual consciousness.
I'm not convinced and there's no science behind this except to say I'm still not terribly
convinced that the brain alone gives rise to consciousness and so then no matter how
much you tweak the brain, yes, it may give us insights, we may be able to think faster,
we may be able to even hold more than one thought at a time but the fundamentals of
actual consciousness experience, I just don't see it happening but I absolutely could be
wrong.
In fact, it's one of those things that would be really fascinating and I would be happy
to admit like I was wrong, I mean if they ever come up with a theory of consciousness,
I would be the first person to happily say I was wrong, like wow, they figured out something
that I was so convinced was unable to ever be figured out and so …
A theory of consciousness sounds to me like trying to make sense out of something that
is unknowable by design because it includes everything and anything and all of its expressions
and it just like you try to add with current level of our understanding, try to predict
if you pour water on the ground, which direction would it go to and at what rate would it be
absorbed?
Or even something as simple as what is it going to rain in the next 15 minutes?
Again, it's that war on nature, war in the sense that we're trying to figure it out,
predict it so we can ultimately control it and so far we haven't won, we haven't done
very well in it but we could change things around, I don't know.
The theories in consciousness right now, I mean none of them even come close, I mean
it's almost a contradiction to talk about a theory of consciousness because by its very
definition a theory is something that the mind does, they're limited to the thinking
mind and the thinking mind is just so, you know, it's so small and it can think in one
thing at a time and that's the way the thinking mind is but everything's happening at the
universe all at once, you know, and I mean even right now, I mean my thinking mind is
processing maybe one thousandth, probably far less than that of all the things like
somehow I'm doing my blood chemistry, I'm beating my heart, I'm doing an infinite amount
of operations right now and on top of it is a small little thinking mind, you know, it
can't even become aware of the workings of what's going on in my own body and yet I'm
supposed to figure out the mysteries of the universe, so I don't know.
What are some of the theories of consciousness?
You know, there's a couple of really popular theories, Tononi and my favorite, you know,
this is an old one going back to Daniel Dennett and they're all interesting theories but
there are more theories about the thinking mind and they do a very good job of showing
how the thinking mind processes information and all this but none of them come close to
explaining what in philosophy is called the hard problem which is really just consciousness
itself and there isn't even a theory that comes close to dealing with the hard problem,
you know, and that's because the hard problem isn't the hard problem, the hard problem may
be the impossible problem when it comes to the thinking mind, you know, and we have this
terrible thinking problem in our country and the world is not necessarily like this, there
are other places in the world they don't think as much as we do and they don't think as much
about thinking as we do, you know, so it's not so much that we think all the time but
we think quite a bit about our thinking, you know, and it sets us on this path like if
we just think enough we'll figure this out and you can see all the scientists rushing
to come up with a cure and, you know, a vaccine or everyone fighting it out because they really
think that what's going on right now is a thinking problem and if you just think enough
thinking problems will be solved but that's just a hypothesis, it may not be a thinking
problem at all, maybe something, you know, like Einstein's quote about, you know, the
level of analysis that got us into this problem isn't going to get us out.
I mean, really maybe the way out is not the way we came in and so, you know, maybe we
have to, you know, recognize the limitations of the thinking mind and kind of maybe there's
other options to thinking, thinking our way out of this and people say, I mean, it's such
an alien, it's such a foreign and strange way to propose the solution to a problem because
we're so taught, we're so inculturated, so socialized to believe that thinking is the
way out of every problem that we can't even conceptualize a scenario where thinking wasn't
the answer and there's this wonderful culture and I wish I could remember a little bit more
in terms of where the location, a very small culture, in fact, on the verge of extinction.
I don't know, maybe I brought it up last time, I can't remember and they are a culture that
probably is our best example on the planet of a culture who they simply don't think,
they don't think the way we, they don't even use language, they sing.
So the way they communicate is, in essence, by like whistling a tune or humming a couple
lines, I mean, that's the way they communicate.
Which part of the world?
Ah, you know, I wish I could, I'm so bad with details like that, it's not language, but
the funny thing is you can't even pronounce their culture correctly because to pronounce
their culture correctly, you have to have the right intonation.
So you know, and intonation is everything which was all right-brained and so it's almost
like this one little place on the planet and they had 400 people and I think they're down
to 200, so it's like they're all virtually extinct.
But they had so little need for the past and the future, I'll send you the YouTube clip
on this because it's a wonderful YouTube clip to watch and it was a missionary who went
there to convert them to Christianity.
And what we discovered is when he started talking about the past, they had no need for
the past and they had no need for the future.
So they're like, what are you so worried about this guy, if he's long been dead, what do
you, and then what do you care about heaven, heaven's the thing that's going to happen.
They just couldn't understand how someone would put the past and the future over the
present moment.
And that's the wonderful thing about, and I mentioned how on the weekends I tried to,
to the best that I can, process reality with something other than the thinking mind and
when you do this, you're immediately thrown into the present moment and wonderful, amazing
thing about the present moment is there's no problems.
And these individuals were described as the happiest people on the planet.
They were almost continuously smart.
They were just joyful because what could be more joyful than losing the thinking mind?
You know, I mean, and now again, we don't necessarily want to just shut that all off
because the thinking mind can be a very good tool when we want to turn it on.
And there's probably times when we could probably solve certain problems with it, it would be
very helpful.
Our problem is we think that the thinking mind is the answer to every, so we're like
turning it up to 11, you know, like that amp on spinal, like we're like, we want to crank
it up like past, you know, even its own limitations.
And because we're so convinced that if we just think, we will eventually think our way
out of this mess.
And I don't, not sure we will.
I think, you know, maybe these are these moments, you know, what would happen?
Think about the possibilities now, what would happen if people recognize the opportunity
of the situation and they started having time that was quiet, meditative, it could be disastrous
in a way for the thinking mind.
People may realize that they don't need their jobs as much as they thought they did.
They don't need, they don't need the nine to five life.
They don't need the social identities that have been thrown on them.
Who knows how many people may wake up to this idea that this life that they have been living
was a fiction, was a collective fiction that was thrown on them.
You know, sometimes, like you said, since birth, people are thrown and all of a sudden
they may realize, look, I don't need this.
I don't need, you know, I don't need anything else except exactly what's happening right
now.
And that's what that culture seems exemplify.
They were just so, they were so pleased with what was happening at the present moment.
They found that nothing else was actually necessary.
And that's a very dangerous thing in a culture that wants to control and wants to, because
you can't control someone in the present moment.
A person who's in the present moment is absolutely happy with everything that they have.
The only way I can control you is if I get you to believe you need something and then
you'll do certain things to get that.
Now, you know, what's, it just came to my mind.
What is really interesting for me to try to understand is whether or not at some point
in our history, there were a group of people who realize exactly what you're talking about,
that we need to depend people on certain products and services based on past and future, and
we have to get them away from the present, which suggests to me if there were people
like that, they were enlightened themselves.
They just realized that, hey, we know what's going on.
We just want to enslave everyone else.
Do you think there was a group of people or civilization at some point that they set basically
in motion this apparatus that had evolved to become what we are calling our civilization
today?
It's an interesting spec, I don't know.
Sometimes I think those types, again, like I said, the controlling types that do seem
to gravitate towards our leaders and the ones who, you know, seem to be controlling the
show in so many superficial ways, you know, it's a very interesting question and sometimes
you do want to sort of get into their skull and figure out what's going on.
Like, do you really know what's going on with all this stuff or are you just as blind
to it as everyone else?
I mean, it's a fascinating, you know, kind of trick of empathy just to see if you can
get into their world.
I don't know.
I think either way, it would be interesting, you know.
Certainly our enlightened, you know, this idea, I mean, it didn't do a lot for progress.
This idea that societies are going to, we'll invent better tools and we'll invent better,
you know, cars and I mean, to have this idea, like always wanting that next better thing.
Yeah.
You know, I mean, maybe that's a genetic trait that we're programmed in a way or if we're
not programmed, we're very susceptible to the idea that the next better thing is genuinely
possible.
Don't you see it as a necessity in order to survive?
Because I actually had this conversation yesterday that we evolved with our technology because
one group of our ancestors, they invented the wheel and discovered fire and the other
group look at them and like, oh, they have those.
We got to build them a little better so we can defeat them.
And this feedback loop went on and on and on and on, which to me suggests that wars
and conflicts themselves are as natural as humanity itself because it has pushed us forward
to where we are today.
Yeah.
Have you read the book Sapiens?
Yes, by Nuvall Harari.
Yeah.
I mean, and I love his description of how, you know, long the planet has been around
and human beings, I mean, we act like we own this place, you know, we've been here such
a fraction of a fraction of it, you know, we haven't even unpacked our stuff.
We've just arrived and we act like we've been here forever.
And then you take a look at the thinking mind, you know, that cognitive revolution that happened
about 40,000 years ago with the Homo sapiens.
And it's very possible that the whole thing you're talking about could have been behind
the cognitive revolution.
It's just this idea that I need something better, a better tool, a better weapon.
And then, and that's the reason, like, literally, we, this idea that I could be a better self,
or I could have a better something, in a way we owe our existence to it.
Because if you look around, all you see are Homo sapiens.
You don't see Neanderthal, you don't see any of the other species of humans that were walking
up.
We did away with all of them.
You know, we annihilated all of them.
So we won.
And we won because maybe this program of like, look, I can be a better me and I could have
more, you know, and you can feel that and it's sort of an ironic, you know, another
guitar or another car or another, you know, slightly bigger house and you can, it's so
interesting because in a way you can intellectually know that you don't need that, but you still
feel it.
And it's like, it's like part of us, you know, part of our species.
So instead of just being completely critical of it, sometimes I am grateful for it because
I'm like, look, you know, here I am, you know, I was having this discussion with my son and
we were talking about like, and he got very, he was like, what would have happened if Neanderthals
had won?
I'm like, he's like, would I still be me?
I'm like, I don't know, you know, no, probably not.
So you know, so in a way we can criticize the need for more, but in another way, I think
we can be grateful for it.
The problem is this need for more has outlived itself.
It's outlived its usefulness.
You know, I mean, we've kind of, we've run it up to the point that people are going to
be trillionaires now.
I mean, that you could see that need for more is just like, do we really need to be a trillionaire?
I mean, you know, who needs, you know, it's almost kind of like embarrassing, you know,
I mean, do you really need that?
I mean, how much, how many things do you need?
And you know, I'm not being, I mean, I've got, you know, six guitars, do I really need
six guitars?
And people could say, so people could throw this on me and I'd say, no, I don't really,
I don't need them, but you know, so it's probably outlived itself.
And I think as a species where we're going to be slow, I mean, people always think, well,
what's happening this year?
But you know, our species, when you, it goes in thousands, tens of thousands of years,
it may take us another thousand years before we recognize these impulses and the direction
to culture could really, you know, take that, that could bring about some substantive changes.
So in the context of human evolution and technological evolution, I think the individual who not
only understood it better than most, but he made it into one of the masterpieces of our
civilization 2001 space Odyssey, Stanley Kubrick, that the monkey finds a bone and realize that
it can crush the skull.
The first thing it does, it hunts to feed its family.
But the second thing it does, it kills the leader of the other monkey group to preserve
the water, the water supply for themselves.
And then the bone goes up and turn into a rocket.
It's just a masterpiece in the level that I think most people don't even understand
what that movie is talking about, that even just the beginning of it, that first 20 minutes.
They show that I show that in class at the beginning of my consciousness class, because
I think it's a wonderful example, the birth of the thinking mind, you know, and you see
one of our ancestors in their first thought.
And like you said, you know, it becomes practical, and it becomes making things better.
And so yeah, hey, there's this I finally found a tool and it is interesting, because even
in the movie, they got it right.
And this is what a thing in McGilchrist talks about how the left brain controls the right
hand.
And of course, most of us are right handed.
And that's how we control manipulate the world, you know, and we use things for purposes that
they were not intended for, you know, this is a bone, but the left brain says, well,
it's not a bone.
It's a weapon.
And all of a sudden, then you go and you know, you figured out how to, you know, it's a tool
and now I can feed my family and you're right, you know, that two of the biggest things,
you know, take care of my needs and make my life better.
But then also this kind of, you know, competition for resources, you know, you stole my watering
hole and now he got that monkey got to go back and take back the watering hole.
And and it did it through absolute violence, it was an incredibly violent scene.
And so it's kind of like this message, like, okay, what was the first thing the thinking
mind did?
Violence was the first thing and violence was the second thing.
And so thinking mind is like, you know, it's an extremely powerful tool, but we also have
to realize its origins, you know, and the first thing the thinking mind did was take
care of thyself, you know, that's what it did and took care of the self.
And so maybe that was the birth of the, when we started, you know, where did the self come,
when did it come online?
You know, and so when I talk to consciousness researchers, that's the first thing I want
to say, okay, your theory of consciousness, that you, when did it, when did it come online?
So if we look at humans, and we've been on the planet for about two and a half million
years, and then it's only this short time ago that we started thinking, but were we
conscious before we started thinking, you know, so those like in the movie that beginning
so, I mean, they were they conscious?
Well, of course they were conscious, they just weren't thinking, thinking added a certain
element, a new type of consciousness, but they were certainly consciousness before then
and that's the thing that consciousness theories are not addressing, they're not addressing,
you know, well, what kind of consciousness is a mouse experiencing, you know, what kind
of consciousness is a dog experience, you know, or all the other mammals or any other
thing on the planet, perhaps.
I mean, that's changing a little bit now with all the panpsychism stuff, but it's been a
really slow change.
And so, but yeah, it's funny you talk about that, because that beginning to 2001, I've
been showing that in class and the students just, they get blown away with it.
I'm like, look, this is a possible way, this is a possible scenario of how humans with
their first thought, you know, and what did we think, you know?
It's also interesting to contemplate what happened to the group of monkey who lost their
leader getting killed by that bone, did they went and they found another bone, but they
put like a thorn on the top of it, they upgraded it.
Now they killed that group and the remainder of that group, they upgrade the weapon and
so on and so forth.
Oh, I'm sure that and that's exactly what, like when a bone gets thrown into the sky
and it turns into, I mean, that's a real good representation of that we're playing the same
game, we just have fancier tools to do it with.
And we're doing it in probably not as violent a ways.
And so, you know, when we out text someone, or we, you know, show them up at work, or
we come up with a better program or, you know, these are like same versions of it, but you
know, far less violent in an explicit way, but it's the same game.
And it's always centered around the self, you know, people don't come up with, like
I don't go out to try to reinvent something so I can give it to someone else.
I mean, I wonder when we reinvent, like we're trying to invent stuff to improve our situation.
Like right now, you know, why are we really suddenly, people are trying to come up with
a vaccine for the coronavirus.
Well, why?
Because we're intellectually interested in it?
No, you know, we're doing it, you know, and that same level, we're trying to come up with
a better weapon, a better bone with, you know, a thorn in it, so it works more effectively.
Yeah, it's interesting.
One part of this whole equation with respect to coronavirus is that the virus could have
escaped the lab doesn't mean that it was bioengineered, it just means that they were, as you said,
they had intellectual curiosity and interest in studying it and upgrading it.
And because they are not taking as much care about their facilities in Wuhan, for example,
in China, it just escaped the lab.
Yeah.
It's possible.
A lesson we should have learned from Jurassic Park.
I mean, the whole, you know, movie said to run this, nature finds a way and we think
we can contain it within the lab.
But you know, it's a very arrogant egotistical thing and we can't control it and it finds
a way and no matter how many precautions we take and, you know, try to control things,
I mean, you can't even control drugs in prison.
And so you think, well, here's a system of ultimate control, you know, but they, drugs
are still, they get into the system and then we think we're going to control nature.
And so who knows what that scenario was, but you know, it's certainly possible.
Yeah, especially when nature in many aspects of it, it operates on an exponential basis.
I think this is a very good opportunity also for people to realize that even though we
connect to our reality in a linear way, as you said, we can only think about one thinking
at the same time, nature doesn't work like that.
It's quantum and it's exponential.
So it goes, it doesn't go one, two, three, four, five, it goes one, two, four, eight.
And by the time you get to the 30th step, you're already at a billion.
Yep.
And, and that's the thing too, it's, you know, when you take a look at our evolution,
we were in tribes of maybe a hundred, 150 and so the, the thinking mind is extremely
limited when it comes to how many, how many numbers we can come up with, you know, and
then all of a sudden we're thrown into this world where people are talking about millions
and there's billions and all these statistics, which are, you know, just very difficult for
the thinking mind to deal with.
And it gets very, I think thinking mind is, is, is, is just frustrated because, you know,
the vast majority of our existence was dealing with groups of a hundred.
You know, this is why, I forget what the number is, but it's this idea that, you know, it
can only really know a hundred people, you know, that's anything beyond that, our mind
just can't deal with.
And so we may have a thousand social media friends, but the truth is you can't know all
of them and, and, and, but now the way information is, uh, communicated on the planet, I mean,
we've, we've, we're, we're not dealing with a hundred people.
Suddenly we're a global entity and, and, and it's like, it's like, here we are, you know,
we're pretty good at juggling three balls and we're okay with that and it, but nature
has like an infinite number of balls and we're trying to, and it just, the whole thing just
fell apart.
We couldn't, we couldn't even comprehend how we could possibly do it.
And people keep throwing the numbers at us, but the mind can't deal with numbers over
about 150.
Yeah, this difference is very important and, um, I've talked about this a lot, how the
sense of certainty that our parents have had, had nothing to do with reality.
It just had everything to do with limited channels of interpretation and distribution
of information that you would watch, maybe CNN, PBS and Fox.
When I was growing up in Iran, we had three national channels eventually, and it was like,
this is all you need to know.
So eventually people started putting satellite dishes on their rooftops and the government
was coming down hard on people because it's all about that.
You have more information, your mind realizes that, oh, I have more options to choose from.
But the thing is, why are you making those choices to begin with?
That's the part that nobody's talked about.
Yeah.
And, and, and, and, you know, um, it can be an oval, even something as simple.
People have talked about this with consumerism.
I mean, it used to be like, look, you know, you had two different types of cereals you
could pick from in the morning and now you've got like, you know, a whole row full filled
with different types of, and you don't even know you, we can't even pick out what kind
of cereal we're going to have in the morning.
And so how are we going to pick out what kind of, and then you have to, you know, it's again
that seriousness.
It's like, look, you, you got to take your news channel seriously.
I mean, but how can you possibly pick the news channel?
How do I know which source to really go with?
I mean, there are so many to choose from.
Um, I, I, it's, it's just overwhelming.
I mean, we're, because we've, we've in one generation went from, like you said, something
manageable, three stations, maybe two, an infinite number of stations that you can tune
into on any social media platform and we're connected not just with, you know, a small
group of people, but we're literally connected with the world.
And that's going to get these wonderful conspiracy theories going, but then we don't know what
to make of them because, you know, who knows, how do you make this assertion as to validity?
You know, there's no supreme, you know, who guards the guards, you know, it's, it's free
for all with, you know, everyone has access, like look, we're talking, we can talk about
whatever we want, you know, and then someone could watch this and, and there, and it's
kind of, again, I think we could look at it in a positive way.
It's, it's like an interesting time when we, when we can, you know, dig a little deeper
and figure out what we believe, you know, and so we can watch things and, and, and so
you stumble on some YouTube channel and maybe you've never seen the person before, but that's
okay because I don't care about their reputation.
I'm just gonna ask them whether I think they've got an interesting thing to say, you know?
So maybe it could turn out to be kind of interesting.
I don't know.
Yeah, I think that was exactly why YouTube became as big as they became, but exactly
because of this loss of monopoly of quote unquote, authoritative sources that they're
shutting down people who will come up with any kind of an argument, any kind of a narrative
that goes against the status quo.
So they're trying to control, again, something that is inherently uncontrollable.
And again, it, it could be really good, it could be really bad, and I think all of this
would make sense once you have some kind of an objective or a goal to assess these steps
and events on that basis, but there is no such a thing as a collective objective or
a goal.
So, you know?
Just have to wing it, you know, again, yeah, I don't think that's gonna happen.
I think it's an unprecedented moment in the sense that we're bombarded with lots of new
information and you can feel that kind of, like I know my daughter was, sometimes she
doesn't even want to touch a computer because it's too overwhelming.
And so, you know, some people are just gonna kind of shut down with it because the human
mind just, you know, it's just a little too overwhelming for it.
And you know, it's not a great positive message to say, look, we're just gonna have to kind
of sit through the movie and wait to see something.
But there's some way to some truth to that, you know, no one knows what's gonna happen
and that could be a positive thing.
We're just gonna have to wait it out.
I mean, it's, you know, it's a yin and yang to everything and even though we're bombarded
with an infinite number of new sources right now, in a way that is like YouTube is really,
it's a fascinating thing too in some ways.
I've stumbled on people's that I could, I would have never, you know, interacted with
on any level a couple of generations ago.
And I mean, even us talking, you know, a couple of generations ago, we would have never connected
and had conversation and yet here we are, you know, so.
Absolutely.
Yeah.
I think it's important to understand.
I'm just quoting what you have behind you.
I believe it's from your book, No Self, No Problem, that you do not exist to serve the
illusion, the illusion exists to serve you.
And that's, that really is the key of it all.
Let me also show your book to our viewers, No Self, No Problem, how a neuropsychology
is catching up to Buddhism.
Very few people are having these conversations.
Kapil Gupta, I don't know if you know him.
I send you a link, he had a, he had an interview with Naval Ravikant.
They're talking about the same thing and the truth basically, that the truth is not good
or bad, is not one way or another.
It's basically my interpretation of what is being discussed here and with those people
and few others that I've come across is that instead of looking outward for more and more
and more, you have to look inward for less and less and less until you get to nothingness.
Because nothingness is a very interesting concept to ponder about, that everything has
been created and built so impermanently on some kind of a structure and that structure
is nothingness.
But that goes against all of our teachings in society and culture and school that, hey,
you just do this, so you gain this.
You do this, it's a gamified kind of a society that makes us lose the point altogether.
We've been taught, you know, be someone, you know, be someone, do something and to craft
this art of carving away all this superfluous stuff and finding out who you are.
And like you said though, you know, it's a very interesting trip to explore nothingness.
And there's a very interesting link between nothingness and consciousness and it's very
difficult to put into words.
Words don't belong to that realm, that's another thing.
It doesn't.
And it shows you what an infinitely small slice of existence words are capable of describing.
And we put so much emphasis on words here in the West, but they're extremely limited.
And that's the thing.
So the self becomes this kind of almost a linguistic, it's so tied in with words and
it shows you that same kind of like, you know, if people just explore this a day, okay, well,
what is your problems?
What's really going on?
And then you discover, well, they're my problems.
And the wonderful thing about this experience of no self is as soon as you do away with
the self as a linguistic tool, that that's all it is, it's this thing we've come up
with that helps us interact with people and it's a convenience and it's a thought of
who we think we are.
And the moment you can come up with that and experience it and embrace it, even a little
bit, you realize that the moment I realized that there is no self to begin with, every
problem that you had goes along with that self, it goes away with it.
And that's a very nice, light place to be.
And I'm convinced that if we can ever connect with our intuition, which is to say, how do
we solve a problem without thinking about it?
It is to go deep into the nothingness, deep, lose our self in that and see what happens,
see what comes out of it, you know, see what comes out of the nothing and maybe a wonderful
creative solution, that's where creativity always comes out of the nothingness.
And that's the thing we think, you know, nothingness, what could come out of it?
Again, it's not a logical argument, but something does come out of nothing.
And sometimes some really good things come out of nothing, some creative things that,
you know, I mean, I'm convinced that all good, interesting, creative ideas come out
of the nothingness.
And if we can collectively kind of indulge, who knows, maybe we'll find a very interesting
way out of this, or maybe we won't want to find an interesting way out of it.
Who knows?
Yeah.
Well, that's the beauty of it too.
Who knows?
We'll see.
Is Terrence McKenna's stone ape theory being discussed in academia at all, the theory that
human brain evolved much faster than the rest of our body because our ape cousins and our
ancestors started munching on some psychedelic substances?
Only from my students.
My students would talk about Terrence, but I have yet to have a discussion with another
academic that would venture off into such ideas.
And you know, it's a very interesting idea that, you know, in terms of evolution, that
certain psychedelics could have given us the kind of leadership, you know, with kindness
that is, that might be really a great way to lead.
I mean, I could have been a really important way to kind of, you know, organize in a good
way.
And so, yeah, I mean, it's coming, it's there, but it's mostly a student driven thing.
You don't find too many of the actual academics talking about mushrooms and, you know, I think
the whole psychedelic thing is letting go of the – if you're going to have a psychedelic
adventure, don't bring your expectations along for the ride.
And don't bring, oh, well, it better be like this or this is – I mean, I think the point
is it's going to be an adventure and it's going to take you to a place that, you know,
you probably didn't think it was going to take you.
And so, it's not much of a surprise that academics who emphasize the thinking mind
to such a high degree, you know, they – I could see why they have downplayed, you know,
the psychedelics and why they've done – I mean, that's a generalization.
There certainly are some psychologists actually right now who are emphasizing the mushroom.
In fact, you know, in a way, although it's long overdue, the research of mushrooms and
psychedelics in terms of treating depression and the cancer and people facing death, you
know, now that research is being taken kind of seriously, which is interesting, you know.
Yeah, this comeback of psychedelic revolution in juxtaposition to everything that is happening
is really interesting because you're absolutely right that your expectations do not belong
to that realm.
You can take them with you, but that's why people have so-called bad trips because bad
trip is not something that it just makes up for it.
It's just something that you don't want to deal with.
You put it in the back of your head.
It just brings it right in front of you, like you have to deal with it, dude.
You have to deal with it.
And when you do stronger things like DMT, we talked about DMT last time, then it doesn't
even matter what your intention is.
You will be taken to a place where to me is the purest experience of nothingness that
you can have, which is the reason I always find it ridiculous when people are like, well,
what did you see?
How did it feel?
Why should I bring it to words?
Yeah.
You know, obviously they want to have some kind of an idea and certainty without trying
it.
And I'm just not serving that purpose because it will defeat the whole point of doing something
that does not belong to this world, literally.
And I think that's the funniest paradox.
The thinking mind always wants to go into a place that it's impossible.
It wants to go into the realm of the unthinking, you know, the realm of being and nothingness.
And you can't take the thinking mind there.
It has no place there.
And so, you know, someone has a certain trip, oh, explain to me your trip.
And people, you know, the person will just laugh.
Like, you know, what do you want an answer?
What kind of problem are you trying to solve?
Does the thinking mind interested in the unknown because of boosting its ego or is it, obviously,
it's not interested to defeat itself?
Is that right?
I think the thinking mind is convinced that thinking is so important because it justifies
its own existence.
In the same way that the self justifies its own existence, you know, it's on a very thin
thread.
You know, the thinking mind, one, it's very new.
I mean, 40,000 years sounds like a long time, but in cosmic terms, it's actually a very
short time.
A weekend.
Yeah.
And so, it's been continuously trying to challenge the rest of reality and convincing itself
that it's really that important.
And when people trip and they have certain experiences and they realize how trivial and
important triviality the thinking mind is, I mean, you don't want to just lose it.
I mean, it's helping us communicate right now.
And so, it has really wonderful things and it can help in certain ways.
But to have that as your gravitational center of your universe, that's not going to work
too well.
You know, I think when we'd venture off just for a little bit into the nothingness and
you come back and you say, yeah, you know, I get this thinking mind thing, but I'm not
going to try to tell you and explain to you what the trip was like.
I mean, what kind of words would you want me to use?
Yeah.
It's like reading books about what chocolate would taste like.
You never got to know.
Nope.
Writing, writing a bike, swimming, you know, there's this, you know, playing a lot of things
that we do.
You do them, you know, and to talk about them is just it's like analyzing poetry.
You know, there's people out there, you know, it's like, okay, you know, if you want to
take that trip and you can do it.
I've had my share of kind of looking into it a little bit, but, you know, I'm not sure
I could take such a trip too seriously.
You know, it's there as it's there.
It's there for its own existence and that's, you know, and that's the center.
You know, when you make that kind of the center of your universe, the gravitational center
of your universe, everything, you know, it's hard to take anything too seriously at that
point and that's a good way to live.
And I think if we could have a little bit, just a nudge, a little bit more of that in
our culture, particularly at times like this, where you see collectively challenges that
we're dealing with make the thinking mind completely fall apart.
And that's because we put the thinking mind as the center of our universe.
That's a dangerous thing to put at the center of your universe because it's so fragile.
If you put the nothingness at the center, and that sounds strange if people say, how
can you have nothingness at the center of your universe?
You've been drinking, but those, you know, who have been, they kind of know what you're
talking about.
Oh yeah, yeah, you know, you know, and we can deal with thinking mind, you know, and
it would be very interesting to see how we would deal with certain problems like the
one we're dealing with right now.
If we were coming from a place of centered nothingness, if that was our center and we
recognize and then, you know, it'd be very interesting to see how it would be dealing
with the situation from a different perspective.
I think one of the best guides about how to get to, because as you said, you cannot get
rid of the thinking mind.
Trying to get rid of it is playing right into its hand.
Again, Kapil Gupta, I think he described it really well that where there was one, now
there is two.
You become an observer of your thinking mind rather than you split what is happening inside
your head.
That quote stuck with me so simple and to the point.
And also what Alan Watts talked about that you just go somewhere and stay quiet for a
month and at first it's going to be really difficult, your mind is going crazy.
By the time that you come down from the mountain, you will join any band of people.
You can cause a lot of problems because you don't have that center anymore to define what
is good and what is bad.
So there are guides other than just smoking DMT that I am not advocating use of any psychedelics
because I don't know where people are mentally.
This is a choice that has to be made on, you have to be very honest with yourself to realize
where are you, who you are and what you want to get out of it to the best of your ability.
But there are ways and we have to get away from this whole noise.
I think about it as shut up the noise so we can hear the music.
Yeah, that's a great line.
The inner chatter, the monkey mind, it's kind of like you said, it's an attentional
problem in a sense.
Are you attending to the voice in your head, are you taking those thoughts seriously or
can you shift that attention over to something else and nothingness is a wonderful thing
to focus on.
Yeah, I sort of lost track there for a second but yeah, I mean sometimes there's just nothing
to say and you just recognize and you dig it.
And it would be a very interesting thing to see how many people have either metaphorically
ventured off into the woods or literally have ventured off in the woods as a result of this
current situation.
And when they come back, what are we going to do culturally, what about all the people
who started meditating and then they come back and again, what if it is a sort of collective
transition into something more interesting, something deeper than the thinking mind and
we all come back and we're kind of like we come back from this and maybe that's the purpose
of situations like this, you know, shake the thinking mind up a little bit, maybe we needed
it.
Shake the thinking mind up and find if there's anything else there.
For so many people, that's the only thing that exists but you go into the woods long
enough and you realize how trivial and small the thinking mind is and you become, as you
said, the observer, you start watching your thoughts which is a great practice especially
for beginners.
You start watching your thoughts and you're like, how did I ever buy into that?
How did I ever think that was me, you know, and that can be very insightful I think.
Yeah, another interesting way to think about it, I think, is when you look at the fast
moving train, it looks like a continuous kind of a thing but once it slows down, you see
the gap between the wagons and that's exactly how, at least to me, it happened, that your
thoughts just one after another, you don't even think about that there is a gap.
So if you slow down and find one gap, I think that pokes a hole into this illusion that
hey, what do you feel and what do you think about, you have to react to it immediately
whether emotionally or physically or verbally, however it is.
Well, and you seem like a fellow guitarist, I see some guitars in the background, one
of my favorite things when I'm playing guitar is you stop thinking and you've really embraced
like I have no idea what's going to happen, I don't even know how I'm doing this, I don't
know how I'm doing it and it all happens and the less you think about it and the more you
get in touch with the spontaneity and the better it ends up being and then the thinking
mind comes back on and says, oh, wait a minute, that was really good and then it screws everything
up.
But there you can notice the same gaps and sometimes it could be a little bit more intentional
because when you're playing an instrument, you're sitting down and sometimes it takes
a while to get that gap and then all of a sudden the gap can get to be pretty – there
are sometimes I've sat down and I didn't even notice a half an hour went by and I was
just so blissful, I'm like, wow, half an hour, I haven't had one thinking thought
the whole time and so music has a certain way and it – again, intellectuals like why
would – music is such – I did a project for my class, I said what – it was a Friday
project and all they had to do is say what music means to me and it blew me away.
I mean sometimes students will write down a couple of sentences, they're trying to
get by and like, okay, I'll do this assignment but – and man, that was the best – one
of the best overall assignments I've ever given students. When I said what does music
mean to me, I just – people went on pages and pages and describing how – and it's
like from an intellectual perspective, that's very interesting because music doesn't do
anything, you know. I mean these aren't professional musicians that are making money, you know.
So if it doesn't make money, it doesn't make us a better – why are you doing it?
Well, the wonderful thing about music is it gives us – it gives us – it's a purposeful
gap in the thinking mind. And it's – and so you start – realize – I mean one possibility
in – I'm kind of exploring this in the book I'm working on is that we don't think
as much as we think we think, which puts another kind of thing into the thinking. Like when
you're in the – it's like the refrigerator problem, you know. You open the door and it
seems like the light's always on.
And so like – and so we think we have a thinking problem because, you know, like right
now, if you start putting the thinking mind on the table, it feels like I'm thinking
all the time. And really, we're not. And in fact, those gaps you're talking about
happen a lot. We just don't notice the gaps. We're so identified with the parts of the
train, you know, we're not even noticing the gaps. They're there and we can work on
noticing them. And the more we notice them, the more we realize how small the train is
and how everything – so much of it is gaps. And I think that's one of the fundamental
reasons why music is so important to people. It's that vacation from the thinking mind
that so many people need. And so I tell a lot of people, you know, get an instrument,
you know. If you're sitting around and you're plagued by your thoughts and you can't seem
to find a way out of the thinking mind because the more you try to get out of it, the more
deep you get into it, pick up an instrument and start messing around. That's a great
way to get those gaps to become more obvious.
Yeah. Well, music for me, you know, I always think of it looking back, especially I'm
writing my memoir now and I have to relive a whole bunch of stuff that was not comfortable
living in the first time around. But it's really interesting going through them now
with this perspective. Interesting that those things happen. I couldn't have planned any
of them. Same thing with music. Like music found me. I didn't find music. It was inevitable.
And the point I think is – well, music is one medium, but it's all about the artwork
and creative process that is built upon, again, nothingness. That you become this conduit
rather than a critical thinker through whom ideas flow. Alex Gray talked about that as
being visionary artists, that you experience the light of the divine, you become a conduit
through whom this light is projected and reflected through your work. And when done correctly
in that context, your audience will have the similar kind of an experience. And, you know,
I read his book like a year and a half ago, The Mission of Art, a few days after I did
my first ayahuasca ceremony. And it was just mind-blowing. I fell in love with music all
over again because of like this is the objective. This is the purpose. Not objective, but the
purpose. And I had those experiences that, you know, I'm gone. I am not here. I don't
know what's going on. I don't know where these things are coming from. And the moment
I try to make sense out of them, they're gone. Which suggests to me, nobody who's done anything
of similar kind of substance that resonates with people, they wouldn't know how they
did it and they wouldn't be able to replicate it themselves.
And that's – and when you start with music, then you start realizing how true that is
for so much of what we do. So when I read the book, I'm like, I have no idea where
that stuff came from. You know, it's like it just falls out of nothingness. You know,
I don't really – and then you can kind of tell, like there's stuff that my ego
sort of creates and that's always crap. And I'm like, okay, just throw that all
out.
Yeah.
And there's the other good stuff that comes from nothing. And you're like, you keep
that stuff because that's the stuff that people connect with. You know, you can tell
whether I'm faking it. And if I'm purposely trying to be clever and you're reading a
book and you're, oh, you know, you can tell when that person was trying to be clever versus
when it came from a really interesting place. And so it's, you know, probably around
any source. I mean, maybe even like accounting. Maybe, you know, there's certain clever
things that happen in accounting that come from the nothingness. I don't know. But
I think music is probably a good place to start and then kind of expand that experience
into the other parts of your life.
Absolutely. Hey, we mentioned number of names. I think it's also valuable to mention the
name Ikkyo. Are you familiar with Ikkyo?
Um, nothing's, I mean, come to mind.
So Ikkyo, it's actually really interesting in my life because I grew up watching Ikkyo's
son, which is an animation about this child Zen monk who's very witty and very intelligent,
always play tricks on emperors and all that. And this is on Iranian television, dubbed
in Farsi. Fast forward to 2011, I came across a traveling Zen monk at a very specific point
of my life who was practicing Zen alongside with psychedelics. And he was, he got kicked
out of the monastery when he was a teenager, exactly because of that, because he had an
experiment with a psychedelic mushroom and he went and told his Roshi about it. I was
like, what, what are you talking about? You don't belong here. And I was like, Oh, I had
a, you know, we had a children program named Ikkyo's son. His name was Ikkyo also, the
Zen master that I came across. And he said that he was named after Ikkyo, who is a Zen
figure and a folk hero of Japan. And this is a man who went again, he was a bastard
of some really wealthy or well-connected individual in Japan. So he was given to a Zen monastery
and he grew up in there and they gave him eventually certification of enlightenment.
And upon reception, he tore it apart. Like this is nonsense. And he left, he left the
monastery and he became the person who was a poet and he would drink and go to brothels.
And a lot of his poetry is about prostitutes and how he feels about them. And his whole
perspective was that sexual desire is a desire that you have trying to defeat it is defeating
the defeating what is. And again, like exactly what we're talking about. And there are so
very few of these figures throughout history that to me at least is like what, what really
is valuable is being found in this realm in a very rare kind of a quantity. So I thought
it would be interesting to also mention Nikkyo. I'll send you some links to some of his poetry.
He's a very interesting figure.
Well, that's it. You know, people who seem to be able to, that's a Zen master trip to
be, to embrace the natural flow of reality. And we all, you know, are just so amazed when
we see someone who just, you can't like get them to be nervous. You can't get them to
be embarrassed. You can't get that. You can't like get them to regret anything that happens.
And that gets very frustrating for, you know, normal people because they kind of like, you
know, this is a perfect flow. And yeah. And then, you know, that there's an old Zen saying
about the snake, you know, some snake bit someone and they're like, well, aren't you
mad? He's like, no, it's the nature of the snake to bite. Why would I be mad at them?
And it's the nature of us to have sexual impulses, to have aggressive impulses. And we get hung
up on this. And we're like, oh, well, you know, I was really angry the other day. So,
you know, oh, well, that means that I'm not very spiritually developed. Really? I didn't
know that. You know, it's just that, I mean, Zen masters get frustrated like anyone else.
The only thing is they don't get hung up on being frustrated, you know, and they have
sexual, you know, the whole flow of that kind of nature. Are we trying to control it or
do you just let it happen? And it sounds like, you know, like so many Zen masters, they were
just really good at just letting it happen. And there's just not that many places in our
culture for people who see, although even though there's not many places, they're still
such a mystery to us, you know, and we know there's something very unique and special
about them, you know, and they can just like, you know, I think comedians are kind of away
in this sense, you know, especially the comedian who would do like live, like this live stuff,
and they just flow and they come up with something and it looks like someone in the audience
is slamming and they just turn it around perfectly. And we're all just kind of, wow, you know,
how'd you do that without thinking about it? It just, you know, it was that perfect kind
of flow of, you know, whatever happens, whatever the world, I'm just going to go with it. And
then it gets very harmonious and poetry-like. And that seems to be the trip of the Zen master.
Of course, the problem is, you know, we're not going to be able to think our way into
it and what they've learned and discovered, you know, is that kind of, I mean, so much
of the Zen literature is anti-intellectual, you know. And so, actually, Alan Watts told
a really interesting story of, you know, going into Koan and he thought he'd be very clever
and he kind of took a frog and put it under his kimono. And so, when he asked like, well,
what's your true nature? And he's going to pull the frog out. And the teacher just looked
at him and says, too intellectual, you know. He thought about it too much. And you can't
plan to be spontaneous, you know. And that's the problem, you know. The Zen, they become
one with nature. And because of that, they're genuinely spontaneous. The rest of us are
too busy planning on what we're going to do to even enjoy what's happening. And we're
too busy being clever or trying to be clever or come up with that next, you know, it's
like in a conversation, you're not really listening to the person. You're really thinking
of your next clever statement, you know. And so, you miss out on what's happening and missing
out on what's happening. You're missing out on reality. So, how can you flow with it if
you're not even attending to it? And so, yeah. I'd be interested in getting in some of that
poetry.
Yeah, for sure. I love it. I start reading them and then poetry started coming to me.
Like, you know, again, I don't think about them. They come to me. Some of them are shorter.
Some of them are longer. And I write them down maybe within a minute or two. And that's
it. I move on to something else. But he definitely has been in such an interesting way from that
children program to the Zen master I met. Very interesting figure. And I think it's
also interesting to mention that just because somebody started doing Zen, that doesn't mean
that they become, you know, so-called enlightened. Because there are a lot of them who get very
occupied with the institution and how they look and the respect they should get and all
that. Again, Ikkyu left the apparatus of Zen establishment back then in Japan for the exact
same thing. None of this matters.
Yeah. Yeah. I mean, that's the whole nature of things becoming formal and creating a bureaucracy.
You know, there's nothing bureaucratic about Zen, but for some reason, people can't help
making it into a bureaucracy. You know, what are the ten principles of Zen? I mean, how
could you not laugh at such a thing? It's like, look, are you really going to try to
force it into ten principles? And I remember another story. I think it was Suzuki who was
giving a speech at Berkeley and he was trying to give like five concepts or maybe it was
the Eightfold Path, some very basic Buddhist principle. And he's like, I can't remember
any of this. He goes, just look it up. Yeah. So, you know, but that's, you know, he went
with it. You know, he couldn't remember it and instead of fighting it and being frustrated
and tensing up and you know, he just, you know, hey, I forgot it. I don't know. You
know, and yeah.
That's awesome. I love it. I hope I'll have you back. My goal is to have 100 episodes
of this podcast by the end of the year. I hope I can get you back maybe in a couple
of months to review the world. Who knows what's going to happen? I love these kind of conversations.
Yeah, it's really enjoyable. And like you said, I mean, right now, we don't know. And
so we have to wait till the end of the movie and it would be fun to get back together and
kind of say, hey, wow, we didn't see that happening. No one could have predicted that
one. Yeah. And yeah, that'd be fun.
Awesome. Chris, where can our audience follow your work?
Most of the stuff I've been doing, probably on my YouTube channel, there's Chris Neibar
PhD. And I make video a couple of times a week and just explore different things. And
I have a Facebook, there's no self. I think if you look up Facebook, no self, no problem.
It should come up. And I usually do post and just about the same stuff we were talking
about different kinds of self consciousness and all these kinds of things. But probably
Facebook and YouTube are probably my main things and Twitter a little bit, but not as
much. And yeah, and, you know, I'm hoping to get something out. My next book is going
to be something about not thinking about consciousness. And hopefully that'll be out probably next
summer probably. But that's something I've been busy with this summer and probably fall.
We'll see where that goes. But I'll keep you up to date. Yeah, we come out soon.
Yeah, awesome. Let me ask you the last question I ask all my guests, which the question itself
has become meaningless for me throughout this process. When I came up with it, I was so
happy like this. This is a fucking great question. But right now I'm like, why am I even asking
this? But I'll continue asking it that if you come across an intelligent alien from
a different civilization, what would you say the worst thing humanity has done? And what
would you say is our greatest achievement? I think if I ran into an alien, and I had
to explain humanity, I would say please forgive us for our thinking mind. We didn't mean it.
The thinking mind had the best intentions. And it's true, it paved the road to hell,
but it was really just doing it had the best intentions. So forgive us for the thinking
mind and all the messes that we got into thinking our way out of the messes. I think the best
thing humanity has got going for us is that ordinary people have experiences beyond the
ordinary. You know, you can have the conversations and sometimes you can find people like, you
know, you would never expect they seem so by the book, and they seem like they followed
all the rules, but to get them in the right context, and they'll still tell you about
some bizarre experience they've had that went beyond the normal. And they know this thing
we're talking about. They know the nothingness. They know the void. They know the connection
between nothingness and somethingness. And they sort of get it. And I think I would convince
the alien, look, you know, we've got hope. We may be possessed by the thinking mind,
but we've also seen beyond it enough of us have. And we know that beyond the thinking
mind, there's a certain connection that we all have. And so if we can just make it through
without, you know, blowing the planet up, if we could just make it long enough without
destroying ourselves, we're going to come up with something really pretty cool. That
would be my plea to the alien.